1. Paediatr Drugs. 2023 Mar;25(2):203-215. doi: 10.1007/s40272-022-00540-z. Epub 
2022 Nov 12.

Adverse Drug Reactions in Children: Comparison of Reports Collected in a 
Pharmacovigilance Project Versus Spontaneously Collected ADR Reports.

Leitzen S(#)(1)(2)(3), Dubrall D(#)(4)(5), Toni I(6), Stingl J(7), Christ 
P(1)(3), Köberle U(8), Schmid M(3), Neubert A(6), Sachs B(#)(1)(9).

Author information:
(1)Research Division, Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices, Bonn, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Physics, Chemistry and Pharmacy, University of Southern 
Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
(3)Institute for Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, University 
Hospital of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(4)Research Division, Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices, Bonn, 
Germany. Diana.Dubrall@bfarm.de.
(5)Institute for Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, University 
Hospital of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. Diana.Dubrall@bfarm.de.
(6)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Universitätsklinikum 
Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.
(7)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, University Hospital of the RWTH Aachen, 
Aachen, Germany.
(8)Drug Commission of the German Medical Association, Berlin, Germany.
(9)Department for Dermatology and Allergy, University Hospital Aachen, Aachen, 
Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) and medication errors in children may 
result from a lack of appropriate drugs, dosages, and pharmaceutical forms. In 
addition, children may respond differently to drugs than adults. Reporting of 
ADRs in the pediatric population is therefore of importance in order to increase 
the amount of safety data. However, different methodological approaches are used 
to collect ADRs.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study was to analyze whether there were 
differences in the ADRs collected in the KiDSafe project (845 ADR reports) 
compared with the spontaneous ADR reports sent to EudraVigilance (697 reports) 
in the same time period. The strengths and limitations of these two different 
approaches should be discussed.
METHODS: The same inclusion criteria were applied for the systematically 
collected ADRs in the KiDSafe project and the spontaneous reports from 
EudraVigilance, and only reports of ADRs coded with hospitalization were 
considered. In both datasets, the number of reports (related to number of 
hospitals), their documentation quality (VigiGrade), causal relationship (World 
Health Organization-Uppsala Monitoring Centre [WHO-UMC] criteria), most 
frequently reported drugs and ADRs, demographical parameters of the patients, 
reported medical histories, and the seriousness of ADR reports were analyzed 
descriptively. The results of the two analyses were compared.
RESULTS: There was considerable underreporting of ADRs via the spontaneous 
reports (0.4 reports per hospital; 697/1902) compared with 70.4 reports per 
hospital (845/12) in the systematically collected KiDSafe reports. Documentation 
quality assessment yielded similar results in both datasets. Among the 10 most 
frequently reported drugs, anticonvulsants such as levetiracetam (6.6%), 
valproic acid (5.6%), oxcarbazepine (3.6%), and lamotrigine (3.4%) were mainly 
reported in the KiDSafe reports, while in the EudraVigilance reports, mite 
allergen extract (4.4%) and allergens (3.6%) were preferentially reported. 
Seizures were the most frequently reported clinically specific ADRs in the 
KiDSafe reports, whereas anaphylactic reactions and urticaria were prominent in 
the spontaneous reports from EudraVigilance. Notably, the proportion of reports 
referring to medication errors and other medication safety related issues were 
more prominent in KiDSafe than in the spontaneous reports (27.8% vs. 12.6% and 
46.0% vs. 29.0%, respectively).
CONCLUSION: In general, reports from both data sources contributed to the 
identification of ADRs and dedicated issues related to drug therapy. However, 
these differed by nature and strength of the signal, likely due to the 
characteristics of the individual method. A combined approach could likely 
compensate for limitations inherent to the single approaches, but will most 
likely only be applied to dedicated pharmacovigilance topics or research 
objectives.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s40272-022-00540-z
PMCID: PMC9931796
PMID: 36369590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Sarah Leitzen, Diana Dubrall, Irmgard Toni, 
Julia Stingl, Patrick Christ, Ursula Köberle, Matthias Schmid, Antje Neubert, 
and Bernhardt Sachs have no conflicts of interest to declare.